# Ford-GoBike-System-Data

2019 Ford GoBike System Data Exploration And Visualization --- Udacity Nanodegree Project

Dataset
The Data consists of information about Bay Wheels GoBike trips for year 2019: There are 2506983 rows of trip data and 19 columns. The data provides three type of information for each trip. Duration of the trip -- duration_sec, start_time, end_time Station information -- start_station_id, start_station_latitude, start_station_longitude, end_station_id, end_station_latitude, end_station_longitude rider's information -- user_type, bike_share_for_all_trip, rental_access_method.

Each trip is anonymized and includes: Trip Duration (seconds) Start Time and Date End Time and Date Start Station ID Start Station Name Start Station Latitude Start Station Longitude End Station ID End Station Name End Station Latitude End Station Longitude Bike ID User Type (Subscriber or Customer – “Subscriber” = Member or “Customer” = Casual)

Download the data for last 12 months January 2019 to December 2019 from https://s3.amazonaws.com/baywheels-data/index.html, with feature documentation available https://www.lyft.com/bikes/bay-wheels/system-data.

Summary of Findings
As I expected, it looks like there are way more trips for subscribers(close to 2M) than customers(close to 1/2M). Subscribers tend to be daily riders so their trip usage is showing way more than casual rider. Riders who are members of 'Bike share for all' program are way less as compare to riders who are not. Month of March & April shows higher usage of rides and also summer months July-Oct. It can be easily seen that weekend trips are lower as expected. For the weekdays, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday seems to have higher number of bike rides. Rush hours tend to have higher number of bike share rides as expected. The peaks at 8 AM and 5 PM confirms my gut instinct that the bike share system is busiest during commute hours. Along the same lines, it should not come as a surprise that the quietest times are in the wee hours of the night. It looks like the trend we were seeing for overall number of riodes/month can also be seen here when it comes to unique number of bikes used/month. The difference is July is no longer the highest number of unique bikes, Instead month of May shows the highest number of unique bikes used. Average number of bikes have dropped almost 50% from January to Decmebr 2019. As we know, there are more subscribers than customers and we can see it when we plot the overall trip usage. Across the months, customer's trip usage shows gradual increase with a little dip in November and May and then having highest usage in December considering people being on holiday break. Subscribers on the other hand shows peaks in March and July with still holding high usage and dropping the usage drastically after October considering the opposite effect of holidays.
The distribution shows more data points for the duration 0-20 minutes for both. Subscriber's highest data points value seems to be little less than customers, considering casual users being casual might ride the bike for longer time. Subscribers might be using the bike for fix and short distance as they ride the bike almost daily. Members and non-members of the 'Bike share for all' program seem to have a similar distribution of trip duration, mostly falling between 0-20 minutes. There is definitely different patter when it comes to their trip usage over 12 months of 2019. Members seem to have a steady trend with not much fluctuation from January to December, where non members shows two peaks, one in March and April and the other one in Octmober. Surprisingly, July doesn't show the highest usage in both members and non members. Both customers and subscribers shows steady mean value and rise in the weekend mean values. Considering the weekend, the rise in overall mean is understandable, and also rise in casual rider is more than subscriber becasue subscribers mainly use the rides for routine work/any other trips. Across the hours of the day, customer duration mean is shows a considerable rise between 10 am to 2 pm and decline towards the end of the day. Subscriber's mean shows steady values between 9-11 minutes. There is rise in values around 2 am -3am, may be due to one or two values being very high. Heatmap is a great way to show the relation between day of the week and hour of the day to measure the ride usage. Subscribers clearly have heavy usage during the weekdays rush hours (Monday - Friday, 7am-9am and 4pm-6pm. Considering these users have subscription and might be using the bike rides for more routine/fix ddistances for example to go to work. Early, middle of the day and late hours as well as weekends have very low usage. On the other hand, customers seems to have good amount of usage on the weekends during daytime hours 9am -8pm as they must be using it for casual bike riding. Eary and late hours of the day seems to have low usage as expected.

Key Insights for Presentation
For the presentation, I focus on the relationship between trip usage and trip duration for both subscribers and customers. Subscribers trips being more than customers, I am expecting to see it is reflected in the trip duration as well. I am going to use violin plot to support the effort.

For overall trip usage across the months, I am going to focus on unique bikes used and their usage across the months. Then, I will include the collective visualization to show the trip usage & duration for members and non members, and heatmap to show the relation between hour of the day, day of the week for both subscribers and customers.
